# Parimukha; Nāsikagga

Idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. So satova assasati, satova passasati.

– Ānāpānassatisuttaṃ

Seyyathāpi rukkho same bhūmibhāge nikkhitto tamenaṃ puriso kakacena chindeyya. Rukkhe phuṭṭhakakacadantānaṃ vasena purisassa sati upaṭṭhitā hoti. Na āgate vā gate vā kakacadante manasi karoti. Na āgatā vā gatā vā kakacadantā aviditā honti, padhānañca paññāyati, payogañca sādheti. 

Yathā rukkho same bhūmibhāge nikkhitto, evaṃ upanibandhanā nimittaṃ. Yathā kakacadantā, evaṃ assāsapassāsā. Yathā rukkhe phuṭṭhakakacadantānaṃ vasena purisassa sati upaṭṭhitā hoti, na āgate vā gate vā kakacadante manasi karoti, na āgatā vā gatā vā kakacadantā aviditā honti, padhānañca paññāyati, payogañca sādheti. Evamevaṃ bhikkhu nāsikagge vā mukhanimitte vā satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā nisinno hoti. Na āgate vā gate vā assāsapassāse manasi karoti. Na āgatā vā gatā vā assāsapassāsā aviditā honti, padhānañca paññāyati, payogañca sādheti, visesamadhigacchati padhānañca.

– Ānāpānassatikathā

# Nasal Anatomy

The agger nasi (from Latin: agger meaning "mound or heap") is a small ridge on the lateral side of the nasal cavity. It is located midway at the anterior edge of the middle nasal concha, directly above the atrium of the middle meatus. It is formed by a mucous membrane that is covering the ethmoidal crest of the maxilla.

– Wikipedia: Agger Nasi

There is one final critical piece of anatomy in the Nasal House I’ve yet to mention—a narrow turnstile in the hallway through which you must pass before you reach the sinus doors. This turn-stile is a common point of entry in and out of the sinuses. But it can also serve as a bottleneck. If the turnstile becomes blocked, nothing can get in or out of the sinuses—not air, not mucus. This turnstile has a name: the ostiomeatal complex, or OMC for short. Ostio refers to the small doors, or ostia, of each sinus, and meatal refers to the middle meatus—the area adjacent to the middle turbinate, in which the OMC is located.

…

Once inside a sinus, you immediately notice a strange, textured wallpaper on all the walls. It is rough and sticky to the touch, with hundreds of small bumps on the surface that look like chocolate chips breaking through the crust of a cookie. On close inspection, you also observe thousands of tiny hairs that look like fine fiber threads completely covering the wallpaper surface.

The bumps are mucus-secreting glands, and they do exactly what their name suggests. The mucus produced by these glands coats the lining of the entire sinus interior, creating a sticky blanket that traps bacteria and other foreign particles. If you look closely, you notice that this mucus blanket is actually moving.

The movement is due to the tiny hairs, which are called cilia. They beat very quickly, about six times a second, in a genetically predetermined direction designed to sweep the mucus and entrapped debris through the ostia and into the nose.

– The Harvard Medical School Guide to Healing Your Sinuses (2005)

***

# Paranasal Sinus Physiology

The paranasal sinuses are known to play a role in strengthening immune nasal function, with the additional production of immunoglobulins and lythic enzymes (such as lisozyme) which destroy peroxidases and the peptidoglycans of bacterial cell walls. Mucociliary clearance into the nasal cavity could then bolster nasal immune defences.

Nitric oxide has been proven to be generated by both the paranasal sinuses and the nasal cavity. Furthermore, the sinuses are capable of generating high concentrations of NO, of greater than 20 parts per million, and higher concentrations still are generated in the nasal cavity. The importance of NO in this area is thought to be twofold, involving both inhibition of viral and bacterial growth and upregulation of ciliary beat frequency. It may therefore be that the paranasal sinuses act as an adjunct in providing the nasal cavity with NO.

– Why do we have paranasal sinuses? (2009)

The paranasal sinuses seem to develop after regression of the erythropoietic marrow in the maxillary, frontal and sphenoid bones and its replacement by cavities filled with gas, which escapes into the nasal fossae through the ostium. The sinus epithelium synthesizes NO continuously. The paranasal sinus cavities form a compartmentalized reservoir of NO, which is released discontinuously in boli after an opening of the ostium. Ostium opening can be induced by sound vibration, either internal (humming) or external (an acoustic vibration added to the in-breath). NO plays the role of an “aerocrine” messenger between the upper and lower respiratory tracts, reducing pulmonary vascular resistance and facilitating alveolar oxygen transfer into the bloodstream. Its physiological role in arterial blood oxygenation could be involved in speech and singing or be activated by physiological snoring during sleep.

– Sinusology (2016)

***

# Neuroimmunology

CSF has also been seen to drain into lymphatic vessels, particularly those surrounding the nose via drainage along the olfactory nerve through the cribriform plate. The pathway and extent are currently not known, but may involve CSF flow along some cranial nerves and be more prominent in the neonate.

– Wikipedia: Cerebrospinal Fluid

Autonomic nervous system innervates all organs in the body including immune system. Accumulating evidences support that immune system is modulated by stress induced by the environment or by the pathological change in the internal environment under different diseases. Autonomic nervous system has two distinct parts: the sympathetic and the parasympathetic system. In physiological conditions, the balance of the two subsystems maintains the homeostasis, stabilizes blood pressure, heart rate, and so on. Sympathetic nervous system uses noradrenaline for neurotransmission and parasympathetic nerves are cholinergic. The involvement of autonomic nervous system in modulation of inflammatory and immune response is an exciting new field of research.

– Handbook of Neurochemistry and Molecular Neurobiology: Neuroimmunology (2008)

In mammals, the LC, a small blue bilateral nucleus in the pons, is the main source of cortical noradrenaline (NA), and through a nearly complete and exclusive innervation of the cortex, plays a significant role in regulating brain function. The LC can be loosely considered a cortical analogue of the adrenal glands, influencing arousal and helping optimize cognitive states for varied environmental and volitional demands.

NA is a modulatory neurotransmitter, known to be involved in regulating sleep-waking states, cortical arousal, signal detection threshold, and decision processes. The LC exhibits a continuum of behavior, ranging from high sustained tonic firing during episodes of distractibility to near-absolute, GABA-inhibited quiescence during REM (rapid eye movement) sleep.

– Coupling of respiration and attention via the locus coeruleus: Effects of meditation and pranayama (2018)

The cholinergic anti‐inflammatory pathway was discovered recently when the anti‐inflammatory role of vagal nerve was demonstrated in endotoxemia and shock. It is a previously unrecognized cholinergic pathway for neuronal inhibition of inflammatory reaction and a novel interface between brain and immune system. The immune‐to‐brain communication can use two distinct mechanisms: one is neuronal and the other is humoral. Vagal nerve afferent fibers can be activated directly by cytokines released by dendritic cells, macrophage‐associated immune cells, or indirectly via chemosensitive cells. The vagal afferents project to the solitary tract nucleus (NTS) and the connections of NTS are able to activate the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), in turn that activation reaches one of the main regulatory centers of hormonal system. Physiological evidences support that vagal nerve fails to suppress high‐dose endotoxin‐induced inflammation but it is efficient in suppression of reaction to mild or moderate doses. So the vagal cholinergic pathway has a particular importance in certain types of moderate inflammatory reactions.

The humoral mechanism of NTS-activation by immune system is mediated by blood cytokines crossing the BBB entering the cerebrospinal fluid at circumventricular organs. Area postrema, one of the penetration sites, is very close to NTS and so the entering cytokines could activate NTS neurons. Cytokines can also bind to the capillary endothelial cell cytokine receptors and enhance release of different neurotransmitters as NO.

Brain‐to‐immune communication is the efferent part of cholinergic anti‐inflammatory pathway. The humoral pathway is the hypophysis–adrenal gland axis, which reduces inflammation via releasing glycocorticoids and catecholamines. Cholinergic fibers participate in PVN–pituitary communication. Parasympathetic fibers also innervate immune system and vagal nerve fibers reach the thymus. This direct effect of vagal efferents on immune cells has not been properly established yet. Vagal efferents are able to suppress the release of inflammatory cytokines such as IL1b, IL6, IL18, and TNFa.

Acetylcholine has also a direct influence on immune cells. It turned out that immune cells express nicotinic acetylcholine receptor proteins. Lymphocytes not only express the receptor but also synthesize acetylcholine as well. Acetylcholine is immune‐suppressive in vitro, decreasing levels of ILs and TNF. Vagotomy results in increased immune reaction, suggesting that vagal tone is important for immune homeostasis. Vagal stimulation has anti‐inflammatory effect in local inflammation models such as carrageenan‐induced inflammation in rodents. It is a fast immunomodulatory effect, much faster than humoral regulation of immune system. Using pharmacological agents, anti‐inflammatory effect of CNI‐1493 requires vagal nerve; bilateral vagotomy eliminates all effects of it. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor‐a7 subunit is the essential component of the receptor necessary for cholinergic anti‐inflammatory reaction. Clinical implications of cholinergic anti‐inflammatory pathway include the application of implanted vagal nerve stimulator for suppression of immune response in autoimmune diseases, application of cholinergic agonists in endotoxemia and sepsis, and new methods for the treatment of autoimmune diseases.

– Handbook of Neurochemistry and Molecular Neurobiology: Neuroimmunology (2008)

Acetylcholine (ACh) can effect vasodilation by several mechanisms, including activation of endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase and prostaglandin (PG) production.

– Acetylcholine-induced vasodilation is mediated by nitric oxide and prostaglandins in human skin (2004)

***

# Interoception

Influential theories of human emotion argue that subjective feeling states involve representation of bodily responses elicited by emotional events. Within this framework, individual differences in intensity of emotional experience reflect variation in sensitivity to internal bodily responses. We measured regional brain activity by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during an interoceptive task wherein subjects judged the timing of their own heartbeats. We observed enhanced activity in insula, somatomotor and cingulate cortices. In right anterior insular/opercular cortex, neural activity predicted subjects' accuracy in the heartbeat detection task. Furthermore, local gray matter volume in the same region correlated with both interoceptive accuracy and subjective ratings of visceral awareness. Indices of negative emotional experience correlated with interoceptive accuracy across subjects. These findings indicate that right anterior insula supports a representation of visceral responses accessible to awareness, providing a substrate for subjective feeling states.

– Neural systems supporting interoceptive awareness (2004)

Given the wide-ranging influence that the LC has on attention, respiration, and autonomic activity, it is unsurprising that it has been hypothesized to play an important role in the effects of meditation. Craigmyle (2013) theorizes that via activation by the ACC, which is a part of the salience, orienting, and executive attention networks, the LC adapts the cortical and peripheral nervous systems of the organism to optimize behavior to a constantly changing environment, and thatmeditation improves the individual’s ability to do this. Importantly, cortical NA has been directly observed to decrease during meditation, and increased gray matter density in the pons (the location of the LC and other important respiratory nuclei) has been found in a cross-section of long-term breath-focused meditators, as well as in a randomized study.

– Coupling of respiration and attention via the locus coeruleus: Effects of meditation and pranayama (2018)

***

Etc: The Vagus Nerve, Endogenous Opioids, Sebum Production, Bone Marrow and Stem Cells
