A quick note as one would like to be conscientious about examples such as one that occurred to me in [this commit comment](https://github.com/chansikpark/segmentally_euphoric_autonomia/commit/2af9ad1772fc05759e565045e861cd6dc7049575#diff-c639cb5f2da1e0eaec96ab5518a55d477abcb3ef40504d6076986de5a62bf104). Attending to an article [here](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2021/06/hbo-max-now-offers-a-partially-ad-supported-service-tier/):

> HBO Max General Manager Andy Forssell says that the company has "worked hard to create an elegant, tasteful ad experience." More objectively, the tier is capped at four minutes of commercial time per hour—which the company says is the lowest commercial ad load in the streaming industry. HBO also says that ads will not play during HBO programming.

> ...

> The ads will be targeted, presumably according to each viewer's streaming history; the company says that "over time, subscribers can expect to see greater personalization in the ads they do see." 

One should like consumers to be informed on introduction, say (or in some settings or whatever):
- Does "history" mean just a straight list of titles that's buffered on the client 'til the end of the month?
  - Or does it include a timestamp?
    - If so, at what time resolution? 🧐
- Does "streaming" (to use the article's verbiage) include "browsing" or is browsing for a title separate from "streaming"?
- Is it a rolling history?
  - What's the interval?
- Can the full extent of whatever accumulated profile be viewed? (bonus points)
  - Can selective attributes of whatever accumulated profile be reset? (more bonus points)
- Will changes to such details be telegraphed, with opportunity for (fucking organized) debate and discussion?

Or have we thrown up our hands and decided on some kind of "tasteful" totalitarianism? 🤨 (..insofar as my (recent) introduction to the concept goes, some takeover of the private lives of citizens being involved in the definition..)
