Having finally read "The Trauma Dharma", some thoughts.

Before reviewing the recommended materials, my initial inclinations are to home in on the tendency for the typical meditation instruction to monotonize, overly psychologize, puritanize, and anti-intellectualize. My position would be that many problems can be avoided by defining clear goals, clearly describing how these goals are accomplished, and clearly describing things to watch out for. Without a clear and accurate idea of what one is doing, what one is trying to do, and for what reason, there becomes a dependence on someone or something outside to bail oneself out when problems arise, particularly when it comes to things in this domain for which some kind of concrete indicator of progress, accomplishment, or even trouble is difficult to come by and rarely provided.

Furthermore, rooting as much of a curriculum in concrete, measurable, and intuitive biological frames (that also make a best effort to be accurate where precision is prohibitive) should minimize a lot of unscientific guesswork and amateur psychobabble. Certainly, though, a psychological frame may be more coherent and tangible in many cases, and can (I imagine) be crucial and even enhanced by the addition of a biophysiological understanding.

Glancing at the listed risks on the corresponding Wikipedia page, research on the yogic traditions of prāṇāyāma should probably be taken into consideration in addition to the body of research on mindfulness.

***

My emerging view is that, barring some set of (prospectively) enumerable disabilities and conditions, any obstacles to a 'saturated euphoric autonomia' always have immediately alleviating remedies. 

Here's how I'd structure the set of issues I've encountered.

- Physiological
  - Musculoskeletal
    - Postural
    - Lesional
      - Myofascial trigger point
      - Muscular fibrosis
        - Enthetic
  - Visceral
    - Cranial
    - Cardiopulmonary
    - Peritoneal
    - Perineal
  - Vascular
    - Hematological
    - Lymphatic
- Psychological
  - Addiction
    - Postural
    - Consumptive
  - Hostility
  - Depression
  - Mania
  - Anxiety/Paranoia

I'm finding it difficult to think of situations where it's *not* been the case that alleviation of some physiological symptoms directly alleviated psychological ones, very much suggestive (ie. to me) of a two-way causation.

In this vein, the way that I'd like to frame the risks of this practice is that there's going to be some quickening of portions of the body's physiology that, without making the necessary lifestyle adjustments and/or adopting the appropriate attentional & perceptual fashionings, can bring about some altered and undesirable homeostasis.


