While I have your attention—and I'd certainly love to think about less boring things—I think I'll see if I can continue harping on about software things while I'm stuck here where I am.

# Actual Terms of Service

Harkening to a call from [the New York Times editorial board back in January](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/23/opinion/sunday/online-terms-of-service.html) to “restore power to consumers by curbing tech companies’ everyday overreach through lopsided consumer contracts”, an idea.

A blackbox software service that reaches a certain level of popularity (say, a ***thousand*** consumers!) can and should be held liable to some kind of [use case document](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_case) which would state to the consumer: “This is exactly what you will get from this service *in exchange* for agreeing to these terms. _Nothing more._ _Nothing less._” Such a document, in one form or another, would exist and be change managed by any competent software development shop. I’d consider it anathema that any organization would do away with the construct altogether.

The “nothing more” part is kind of important. If an interaction with the system produces a side effect (eg. feeding an ad system) that will in whatever indirect way eventually affect the consumer, this would legally need to be declared up front along with the exact scope of this behavior .

Any changes to said document, and therefore functionality, would have to be telegraphed in advance in some appropriate way, and any demonstrable and substantive violation of the document would, in the case of damages, render the provider legally liable. The full change history of the document should be maintained and accessible as well so that some sense of shared history persists. The manner in which an organization manages the evolution and fulfillment of such a document would also allow for it to differentiate itself as one that is more responsible, honest, creative, and skillful than another.

It would impose a meaningful self-regulatory framework for businesses. It would also give consumers the opportunity, at a glance, to well-understand just what the heck one is getting oneself into.
