## The Software Engineering Process

To my sensibilities, the ongoing spate of engineering catastrophes was very much predictable, as far back as the late aughts and early teens if I were pressed to gripe on this here my armchair. As I recall, it was around that time that these various strains of asinine development processes started to proliferate and infiltrate my own professional environment. Having been inculcated in the ways that software engineering distinguishes itself from computer science—and (ugh) "coding"—and having witnessed and directly touched the rigors and products of more stringent processes, I can recall a sense of debasement as a wave of rabid development mentalities began to invade the pristine towers of my indoctrination.

I assert that the problem with such rabid development mentalities is, in short, that the big picture gets lost as one chases the ephemeral high of checking off lists. Certainly, though, at the outset of development there are unknowns for which research, experimentation and play—with high cost variance—is requisite to the insight required for higher-level orientation. My cursory view is that business pressures to salvage the products of such research, experimentation and play has precipitated an accumulating distortion or abnegation of the responsibilities to many of the stakeholders of many of even the most popular software products in the market. A race to the bottom as it were.

One thought in this regard is that maybe software developers get paid too much. There's a real, almost-spiritual reward to the craft itself that is epitomised by the very existence and vibrancy of public software projects, and I can recall my own empty obsession with 'optimizing income numbers' in the earliest portions of my career. I might speculate that mine is not an isolated case. Nowadays, I'd be perfectly content to subsist on a dignified basic income with the freedom to bang my head against a given problem indefinitely. Though this may be due to my own personal circumstances, most certainly, I'd like to think that the fresh-blooded software engineer that considers this paradise is one who is true to his profession.

Another aspect in which rabid development mentalities subvert the software engineering process is with respect to the meta-artifacts produced by the latter and the meticulous change processes that get demolished with all that rabidity. The little-z zen of software engineering, in my view, is that the software engineer has finished his work only when he is completely replaceable. While the naive or entrenched might view this as a threat to one's livelihood, in my view, it's the way to professional freedom. It's also, again in my view, the way to maintain fairness and accountability. The fact that software that serves ***BILLIONS*** of people is regularly changed under the hood without those ***BILLIONS*** being properly informed of those changes is fucking disgusting (*cough* dynamic websites *cough*). Any change that affects the lives of even a *hundred* people should be accompanied by a full and detailed story of how the change is to or has come about (eg. "On January 23rd, 4:56:12 PM EST, Devin Smith came across a user complaint..."). Anything less is tyranny I say, as I gripe sitting on this here my armchair.
