Supposing that healthy well-consenting subjects can be recruited, I'm inclined to make claim here that there is a significant dimension to such a study's design that is liable to be overlooked, depending on the metaphysical inclinations of the study's designers. Namely, the degree to which a given subject is accompanied by someone else with prior experience in whatever "euphoria cultivation practice", is here claimed to have a significant impact on the speed and ease with which the subject will acquire skill in the practice.

There's an elementary demonstration by which I find some evidence for this claim. I first instruct an untrained subject to focus on their palms, while simultaneously "energizing" my own. Notably, when asked whether they feel anything in their palms, they report some unfamiliar tingling. I then have them remain focussing on their palms again for some period of time, without my own "energizing", then tell them I'm going to start "energizing" my own, at which point I do, and then tell them I'm going to stop, which I also do, and wait for some period of time. Afterwards, the subject reports that there is a correlation between when I claim to them that I'm "energizing" and their feeling some tingling.

There are many simple ways to make this demonstration more convincing to an objective third party, for instance by a timer that goes off every 30 seconds or so, a private coin toss to dictate whether the "energizer" "energizes" or not, and some private noting mechanism for the subject to indicate the degree to which they feel that unfamiliar tingling or not. Other measures can be used to suss out the characteristics of the effect (eg. physical isolation, different body parts, prior rapport).

In this way, it may even be possible to further nail down the phenomenon by objective measurement. I've encountered some candidate methods, such as skin conductance, skin nitric oxide levels, and/or infrared radiation. The mechanism by which the subject is affected by the "energizer" is perhaps something to do with those set of neurons that are claimed to have "mirroring" capabilities, but this remains in the realm of heavy speculation.

This is, in sum, a thread of investigation by which "energy healing" and such things might be investigated in order to suss out any risks, determine limitations and implications, and possibly even engineer streamlined techniques as adjunctive therapy for specific circumstances (eg. audio-visual materials guided by real-time biometric visualizations for specific conditions or circumstances). For instance, in the case of shortness of breath related to cigarette smoke inhalation, I find that "proprioceptively locating" my larynx (the dimensions of which can perhaps be best intuited by direct lateral manipulation) and trachea all the way into the level of the carina (eg. by following the kyphosis of the thoracic vertebrae) to provide relief in most cases. Notably, sustained relief requires quite a bit of persistence in this way, not to mention cessation of cigarette smoke inhalation in the first place. Speculatively, this method has some effect on pulmonary mucociliary clearance physiology. An adjunct method is to change frames from proprioceptive locating to evaluating the quality of the breath itself, eg collapsing whatever three-dimensional perception of the breath into a single dimension of "comfort" and adjusting the speed and depth of the breath to breathe through any tensility. The difficulty here would be that in more severe circumstances, reducing breath intake to work out any tension can be suffocating in itself. Very slow, very long breathing is perhaps a good baseline ([nb.](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31572221/)).

It's also worth noting that there appear to exist some sort of governmental licensing standards for such practices. These seem worth looking into, in addition to whatever training curricula for extant traditions.

A training curriculum that relies on live guidance, however, is not as scalable as some pre-packaged set of stand-alone course materials, and consistency of instruction is more difficult to ensure, reducing the value of any accompanying biometric measurements.
