While my interest in Buddhism itself began maybe a year or so earlier, the first time I actually sat to meditate was in 2010 or 2011 with Bhante Gunaratana's *Mindfulness in Plain English* in hand. The instructions in that book, if I'm not mistaken, prescribe sustained attention at the nares or around this area. I think the most I could sit for was around 15-25 minutes, but after just a handful of attempts, that strange tension at the nose bridge—a not uncommonly reported phenomenon amongst beginning meditators in online forums—began to appear as soon as I began to meditate. The mysterious tension became something I could bring about at will. The progression of my practice after that is difficult to describe in any orderly way, but this physiological sign may be considered one of a handful of possible milestones for the beginning meditator. Day 2 or 3 of the Goenka 10-day retreats seem to consider it as such. The course instruction lists a long list of sensations to watch for at around this time.

Compare this to the method advised by atleast two Thai Forest Ajahns, wherein the breath is felt wherever it is felt so long as the quality of the attention is stable and comfortable or natural.

The next milestone in my own progression was in the appropriation of a mettā practice, that is, rather than following instructions, trying to come up with something that was true to my own proclivities. I evoked the friendliness of some imagined waitress or barista to capture my interpretation of the practice, and as I did so, I found that there was some very light head tingling that would appear and dissiapte periodically correlated to each respiration. I recall that some meticulousness was required to ferret out unnecessary mental and physical actions in order to isolate the minimal action necessary to bring about the pleasant tingling at will. What I ended up with is perhaps best described as the ability to produce "squeezed" tingling, something that runs out of "juice" very quickly. 

Not knowing what to make of these two abilities—the nose bridge tension, the "squeezed" tingling—and not knowing where to go from there lasted for years until my first Goenka retreat in 2015.

When it comes to the nose bridge tension, the critical piece of instruction came from consulting with the instructor on day 2 or 3 who told me to move the attention *upwards*, a revolutionary idea for me at the time. The tension evolved into something else that night, a set of spotty burning sensations all across the top of my skull, a kind of scary burning bruising sensation that I nonetheless had some degree of control over. Once it got to a certain point, I just let go and slept, waking 'as though no time passed', neither pleasurable nor uncomfortable... 

And then, at some point into the entire course, well into the Vipassana phase of it, the "squeezed" tingling had a lot more "juice". Following the course, at a certain point, I realized that not "squeezing" was ultimately more reliably able to get me further in saturating the body with euphoria.

***

Any prescriptive scheme I'd come up with would be addressed to myself in 2010 or 2011, benefitting from hindsight and some speculation as to what may have been a better progression. Basically, meditation instructions I wish I had 10 years ago. This should necessarily include content that incorporates all the posture, muscle, and anatomy stuff I've picked up over the last couple of years. The most important aspect of these things would be to coax out *why* these things are worth learning and *how* to study the stuff without being intimidated by the volume and lack of background.
