In contemplating the creation of some prescriptive scheme, two further considerations come to mind.

The first is whether a "secular jhāna" is possible, safe, and desirable. When it comes to 'euphoric tingling', there is reason to assume that there are many non-Buddhist contexts in which its cultivation is desirable (eg. in other Asian contemplative traditions; ASMR). While broader societal implications of making such a practice more accessible is not something that I'm aware of having been thought out in great detail if at all, it would seem that nailing down the full psychophysiological implications would be a necessary first step. Based on my own cursory studies, there are a wealth of equipment and methods available for just this task, though perhaps gated by some amount of bureaucracy. A convincing proposal seems warranted here.

From the perspective of the early Buddhist texts, there are instances to be found of jhāna practitioners outside of the tradition. Though this does at first glance seem at odds with the idea that sammāsamādhi *is* jhāna, one might reconcile this as denoting that jhāna by itself is an incomplete practice without the other psychological trainings that constitute the Buddhist curriculum. The danger, according to the texts, is that such a non-Buddhist practitioner, after many many eons of alighting in bliss, befalls to some eventual undesirable existence.

The second consideration is whether some prophylactic benefit may be imparted by the use of some easily produced audio-visuals. At the simplest, some pre-recorded audio that helps the listener stay focused on breathing and feeling wherever the breathing is felt may be demonstrated to have some anti-viral effect. This seems like a low-hanging fruit worth looking into immediately. Maybe these could even be explicitly recommended on planes or other such risky areas (eg. public transportation).

A cursory search yields:

> Inhale through your nose and exhale through your mouth. It’s not just something you do in yoga class – breathing this way actually provides a powerful medical benefit that can help the body fight viral infections. 

— Prof. Louis J. Ignarro, 1998 Nobel Prize winner, [June 19, 2020](https://theconversation.com/the-right-way-to-breathe-during-the-coronavirus-pandemic-140695)

https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/pdf/10.1089/acm.2020.0177

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4079606/
